:Title: Residential Sorting and the Incidence of Air Quality Improvements
:slug: research_summary_sorting_air_quality

July 2017

**Download Paper** |pollsort|_

.. |pollsort| image:: {filename}/images/pdf.png
.. _pollsort: {filename}/pdf/Sullivan_Sorting_Pollution.pdf

**Abstract From Paper**

While the costs of environmental policies are generally thought to be
regressive, the distribution of benefits is less understood.  This paper
explores the incidence of an unexpected decrease in air pollution in
metropolitan Los Angeles by estimating the resulting change in housing costs
and neighborhood demographics.  The decrease in air pollution was caused
jointly by the California Electricity Crisis of 2000 and the RECLAIM
cap-and-trade program for NOx emissions and impacted neighborhoods
differentially based on their location relative to major polluters and local
wind patterns.  I measure local exposure to this pollution shock using a
dispersion model developed by atmospheric scientists which calculates the
effect of individual firms' emissions on the air quality of nearby locations.
The estimates show that (a) housing rents increase significantly and as much as
house prices; (b) 9% of low-income households leave the sample area due to
improved air quality; and (c) low-income households are rarely home owners who
would benefit from increased housing wealth.  I show that a standard
residential sorting model predicts that when low-income residents respond to
improved amenities by leaving, the distribution of benefits from the
improvement is likely regressive.  Together, these results suggest that the
distribution of benefits from improved air quality likely favors higher-income
households.
